  Observing Responsibility-Related Behaviors in a University Setting


Deniz Kandemir and Dominica 
University Of Warsaw
23 November 2025


    The purpose of this observation study was to examine everyday behaviors related to the personality trait of Conscientiousness within the OCEAN framework. The APA Dictionary of Psychology defines conscientiousness as “the tendency to be organized, responsible, and hard-working” (VandenBos, 2007, p. 218). 

In this study we examine conscientiousness through the behavior of punctuality . Eisenberg et al. (2014) argue that conscientiousness is fostered by self-regulation and internalized compliance with standards, reflecting disciplined behavior such as punctuality (Eisenberg et al., 2014). We used a naturalistic observation method and observed punctuality in 6 different classes over two days. We defined punctuality as the students being at class before the scheduled lesson session. Students who are present at the class before the scheduled lesson time were coded as “on time” and students who arrived after the lesson time were coded as “late”. In prior research, punctuality has been linked to conscientiousness. Back et al. (2006) claims  that three factors of the Big Five are relevant with respect to punctuality behavior: conscientiousness, agreeableness, and neuroticism (Back et al., 2006; Ellis & Jenkins, 2015).


Method of This Study

  The observation took place in university classes with two observers and observers took places at the back of the class in order to see who was late. We did not interact with any individuals and noted behaviours discreetly to avoid influencing actions. We also noted everyone who was present at the class before the lesson time. If a student arrived after the lesson officially began, that student was marked as late (i.e., not punctual). Thus, punctuality was operationalized as being present at or before the start of class, and each student was noted as either “on time” or “late.”

The observations were conducted in 6 different classes with at least one observer at every class. Observed classes were included Japanese Language (N = 18), Introduction to Psychology (N = 44), Philosophy (N = 41), Academic Skills (N = 24), Research Methods (N = 47, observed on two occasions), and a Biological Bases of Behaviour (N = 33). In this report, “N” refers to the number of students observed in each class session. Japanese Language and Biological Bases of Behaviour classes were started early in the morning; therefore the punctuality rate for these classes were lower compared to classes that were starting later in the day.



Results and Discussion
